\input texinfo  @c -*-texinfo-*-
@setfilename datetools.info
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up

@ifinfo
@dircategory datetools
@direntry
* datetools: (datetools).	Command line tools to fiddle with dates.
@end direntry

This manual documents the datetools package.

Copyright @copyright{} 2011 Sebastian Freundt.

Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this
document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License,
Version 1.3 or any later version published by the Free Software
Foundation; with no Invariant Sections, with no Front-Cover Texts,
and with no Back-Cover Texts.  A copy of the license is included
in the section entitled "GNU Free Documentation License".
@end ifinfo
@c
@setchapternewpage odd
@settitle datetools User's Manual
@c
@titlepage
@sp 6
@center @titlefont{datetools User's Manual}
@sp 4
@sp 1
@sp 1
@center September 2011
@sp 5
@center Sebastian Freundt
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
Copyright @copyright{} 2011 Sebastian Freundt.

Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this
document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License,
Version 1.3 or any later version published by the Free Software
Foundation; with no Invariant Sections, with no Front-Cover Texts,
and with no Back-Cover Texts.  A copy of the license is included
in the section entitled "GNU Free Documentation License".
@end titlepage
@page

@node Top
@top datetools

datetools are a bunch of tools that revolve around fiddling with dates
and times in the command line with a strong focus on use cases that
arise when dealing with large amounts of financial data.

@menu
* Introduction::        Motivation, background, etc.
* Calendars::           Calendar concepts and format specs
* strptime::            Command line version of the C function
* dcal::                Convert dates between calendars
* dadd::                Add durations to dates
* ddiff::               Compute durations from dates
* dseq::                Generate sequences of dates
* dtest::               Compare dates
@end menu

@include strptime.texi
@include dcal.texi
@include dadd.texi
@include ddiff.texi
@include dseq.texi
@include dtest.texi

@node Introduction
@chapter Introduction

The datetools package is an attempt to provide a comprehensive set of
command line tools that behave intuitively, support a similar variety of
inputs, allow for normalised output and, most importantly, cover nearly
all tasks that arise whilst dealing with huge amounts of dates and
unusual calendars.

In day to day business, the authors have run across a plethora of
approaches to tackle seemingly simple problems.  When the command line
is a necessity most of these involve perl or awk, which suffer from bad
maintainability simply because those tools weren't made to process dates
and times in particular, and for the same reason those approaches are
anything but fast.

And conversely, good maintainability and fast processing is often seen
in integrated systems, such as R or database solutions but they come at
a price: little flexibility.  It's very uncommon to import billions of
dates into a database just to compare if they are greater than or equal
to a given date.  Besides, most of the time those billions of dates come
from external sources and have to be brought into shape before or whilst
importing them into an integrated system.


@node Calendars
@chapter Calendars



@summarycontents
@contents
@bye


@c Remember to delete these lines before creating the info file.
@iftex
@bindingoffset = 0.5in
@parindent = 0pt
@end iftex
